---
sidebar_label: 'Eloquent'
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Eloquent

## Introducation

Vania includes [Eloquent](https://pub.dev/packages/eloquent), an object-relational mapper (ORM) that makes it enjoyable to interact with your database. When using Eloquent, each database table has a corresponding "Model" that is used to interact with that table. In addition to retrieving records from the database table, Eloquent models allow you to insert, update, and delete records from the table as well.

:::caution
Before getting started, be sure to configure a database connection in your application's `config/database.php` configuration file.
:::

## Generating Model Classes

To get started, let's create an Eloquent model. Models typically live in the `app\models` directory and extend the Vania Model class. You may use the make:model Vania command to generate a new model:

```shell
vania make:model model_name
```

## Eloquent Model Conventions

Models generated by the make:model command will be placed in the `app/Models` directory. Let's examine a basic model class and discuss some of Eloquent's key conventions:

```dart

import 'package:vania/vania.dart';

class User extends Model {
  
}


```

## Table Names

In the example above, you may have noticed that we didn't explicitly specify the database table corresponding to our User model. By default, when you create the model using the Vania CLI, it will prompt you to enter the table name. However, if you wish to customize the table name further, you can use the super keyword to override it:

```dart
import 'package:vania/vania.dart';

class User extends Model {
  User() {
    super.table('users');
  }
}

// Model with the new table name 

class User extends Model {
  User() {
    super.table('user_tables');
  }
}
```

By following these conventions, you can effortlessly define and interact with database tables using Eloquent within your Vania application.

## Retrieving Results

### Retrieving All Rows From A Table

To begin a fluent query, use the query method on the Vania model. The query method returns a fluent query builder instance for the given table, allowing you to chain more constraints onto the query and then finally get the results. In this example, let's just get all records from a table:

```dart
import 'package:blog/app/models/user.dart';
import 'package:vania/vania.dart';

class HomeController extends Controller {
  Future<Response> index(Request request) async {
    
final users = await User().query().get();

    return Response.json(
            {
                'message': 'Hi ${users[0]['first_name']} ${users[0]['last_name']}',
            }
        );
  }
}
```

### Retrieving A Single Row / Column From A Table

If you just need to retrieve a single row from the database table, you may use the first method. This method will return a single Map

```dart
import 'package:blog/app/models/user.dart';
import 'package:vania/vania.dart';

class HomeController extends Controller {
  Future<Response> index(Request request) async {
    
final user = await User().query().where('id','=',1).first();

    return Response.json(
            {
                'message': 'Hi ${user['first_name']} ${user['last_name']}',
            }
        );
  }
}
```

### Retrieving exists

Determine if any rows exist for the current query.

```dart
final user = await User().query().where('id','=',1).exists();
```

### Retrieving A List Of Column Values

If you would like to retrieve an array containing the values of a single column, you may use the pluck method. In this example, we'll retrieve an array of role titles:

```dart
final users = await User().query()->pluck('first_name')

for(String user in users){
    print(user);
}
```

You may also specify a custom key column for the returned array:

```dart
final users = await User().query()->pluck('first_name','name')
```

## Selects

### Specifying A Select Clause

Of course, you may not always want to select all columns from a database table. Using the `select` method, you can specify a custom `select` clause for the query

```dart
final users = await User().query().select(['first_name','last_name','email']).get();
```

The `distinct` method allows you to force the query to return distinct results:

```dart
final users = await User().query().distinct().get();
```

### Raw Expressions

Sometimes you may need to use a raw expression in a query. These expressions will be injected into the query as strings, so be careful not to create any SQL injection points! To create a raw expression

```dart
final users = await User().query().selectRaw('count(*) as user_count, status').get();
```

## Joins

### Inner Join Statement

To perform a basic SQL "inner join", you may use the join method on a query. The first argument passed to the join method is the name of the table you need to join to, while the remaining arguments specify the column constraints for the join. Of course, as you can see, you can join to multiple tables in a single query:

```dart
final user = await User().query()
    .join('clientes_grupos','clientes_grupos.user_id','=','users.id')
    .first();
```

### Left Join Statement

If you would like to perform a "left join" instead of an "inner join", use the leftJoin method. The leftJoin method has the same signature as the join method:

```dart
final user = await User().query()
    .leftJoin('clientes_grupos','clientes_grupos.user_id','=','users.id')
    .first();
```

### Right Join Statement

If you would like to perform a "right join" instead of an "inner join", use the rightJoin method. The rightJoin method has the same signature as the join method:

```dart
final user = await User().query()
    .rightJoin('clientes_grupos','clientes_grupos.user_id','=','users.id')
    .first();
```

## Unions

The query builder also provides a quick way to "union" two queries together. For example, you may create an initial query, and then use the union method to `union` it with a second query

```dart
final unionUsers = User().query().whereNull('first_name');

final users = await User().query()
    .union(unionUsers)
    .get();
```

## Where Clauses

### Simple Where Clauses

To add `where` clauses to the query, use the `where` method on a query builder instance. The most basic call to `where` requires three arguments. The first argument is the name of the column. The second argument is an operator, which can be any of the database's supported operators. The third argument is the value to evaluate against the column.

For example, here is a query that verifies the value of the "votes" column is equal to 100:

```dart
final votes = await User().query().where('votes', '=', 100).get();
```

Of course, you may use a variety of other operators when writing a where clause:

```dart
final votes = await User().query().where('votes', '=>', 100).get();
final votes = await User().query().where('votes', '<>', 100).get();
final votes = await User().query().where('votes', 'like', '100%').get();

```

### Or Statements

```dart
final votes = await User().query()
                  .where('votes', '=', 100)
                  .orWhere('name','=','John')
                  .get();
```

## Additional Where Clauses

### whereBetween / whereNotBetween

The `whereBetween` method verifies that a column's value is between two values:

```dart
 final voutes = await User().query()
                  .whereBetween('votes', [1, 100])
                  .get();
```

The `whereNotBetween` method verifies that a column's value lies outside of two values:

```dart
 final voutes = await User().query()
                  .whereNotBetween('votes', [1, 100])
                  .get();
```

### whereIn / whereNotIn

The `whereIn` method verifies that a given column's value is contained within the given list:

```dart
 final users = await User().query()
                  .whereIn('id', [1, 2, 3])
                  .get();
```

The `whereNotIn` method verifies that the given column's value is not contained in the given list:

```dart
 final users = await User().query()
                  .whereNotIn('id', [1, 2, 3])
                  .get();
```

### whereNull / whereNotNull

The `whereNull` method verifies that the value of the given column is NULL:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereNull('updated_at')
                  .get();
```

The whereNotNull method verifies that the column's value is not NULL:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereNotNull('updated_at')
                  .get();
```

### whereDate / whereMonth / whereDay / whereYear

The `whereDate` method may be used to compare a column's value against a date:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereDate('created_at', '=','2023-12-25')
                  .get();
```

The `whereMonth` method may be used to compare a column's value against a specific month:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereMonth('created_at', '=','25')
                  .get();
```

The `whereDay` method may be used to compare a column's value against a specific day of the month:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereDay('created_at', '=','25')
                  .get();
```

The `whereYear` method may be used to compare a column's value against a specific year:

```dart
final users = await User().query()
                  .whereYear('created_at', '=','2023')
                  .get();
```

## Advanced Where Clauses

### Parameter Grouping

Sometimes you may need to create more advanced where clauses such as "where exists" or nested parameter groupings. The Laravel query builder can handle these as well. To get started, let's look at an example of grouping constraints within parenthesis:

```dart
final users = User().query()
                  .where('name','=', 'John')
                  .orWhere((QueryBuilder q){
                    q.where('votes', '>', 100)
                    .where('title', '<>', 'Admin');
                  })
                  .get();
```

As you can see, passing a Closure into the orWhere method instructs the query builder to begin a constraint group. The Closure will receive a query builder instance which you can use to set the constraints that should be contained within the parenthesis group. The example above will produce the following SQL:

```sql
select * from users where name = 'John' or (votes > 100 and title <> 'Admin')
```

The whereExists method allows you to write where exists SQL clauses. The whereExists method accepts a Closure argument, which will receive a query builder instance allowing you to define the query that should be placed inside of the "exists" clause:

```dart
final users = User().query()
                  .whereExists((QueryBuilder q){
                    q.select(['id'])
                      .from('orders')
                      .whereRaw('orders.user_id = users.id');
                  })
                  .get();
```

The query above will produce the following SQL:

```sql
select * from users
where exists (
    select 1 from orders where orders.user_id = users.id
)
```

## Ordering, Grouping, Limit, & Offset

### orderBy

The `orderBy` method allows you to sort the result of the query by a given column. The first argument to the `orderBy` method should be the column you wish to sort by, while the second argument controls the direction of the sort and may be either `asc` or `desc`:

```dart
final users = await User().query().orderBy('name', 'desc').get();
```

### groupBy / having

The `groupBy` and `having` methods may be used to group the query results. The `having` method's signature is similar to that of the `where` method:

```dart
final users = await User().query().groupBy('account_id').having('account_id', '>', 100)
.get();
```

### skip / take

To limit the number of results returned from the query, or to skip a given number of results in the query (`OFFSET`), you may use the `skip` and `take` methods:

```dart
final users = await User().query().skip(10).take(5).get();
```

Alternatively, you may use the limit and offset methods. These methods are functionally equivalent to the take and skip methods, respectively:

```dart
final users = await User().query().offset(10).limit(5).get();
```

## Inserts

The Model also provides an `insert` method for inserting records into the database table. The `insert` method accepts a Map of column names and values to insert:

```dart
 await User().query().insert({
      'name': 'John',
      'email': 'john@example.com',
      'password': '123456',
    });
```

### Auto-Incrementing IDs

If the table has an auto-incrementing id, use the `insertGetId` method to insert a record and then retrieve the ID

```dart
 final userId =await User().query().insertGetId({
      'name': 'John',
      'email': 'john@example.com',
      'password': '123456',
    });
```

## Updates

Of course, in addition to inserting records into the database, the Model can also update existing records using the `update` method. The `update` method, like the `insert` method, accepts a Map of column and value pairs containing the columns to be updated. You may constrain the `update` query using `where` clauses:

```dart
await User().query()
    .where('id','=',1)
    .update({
      'name': 'Vania',
    });
```

## Deletes

Of course, the Model may also be used to delete records from the table via the `delete` method:

```dart
await User().query()
    .where('id','=',1)
    .delete();
```

:::note
Special thanks to [Isaque Neves](https://github.com/insinfo/eloquent_dart) for the helpful Dart Eloquent package.
:::
